Bhagwan Sahai Khandelwal v State of Rajasthan and another
Supreme Court of India

27 January 2000
Cr.As. No. 438 of 1998 with No. 439 of 1998
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  This appeal is by the Magistrate concerned, who had not taken cognizance under Section 307 IPC though charge-sheet had been filed. We are not entering into the merits of the conclusion of the learned Judge as to whether the Magistrate could have refused to take cognizance under Section 307 IPC.
2. We are examining only the correctness and propriety of the order of the learned Judge in making remarks against the Magistrate on the basis of what was stated in a petition filed before the learned Chief Justice which was ordered to be treated as a petition under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
3.  It is no doubt true in that petition that serious allegations had been made against the Magistrate, who is the appellant before us. But without even offering an opportunity to the Magistrate in the proceeding, and without having his say in the matter, the learned Judge could not have jumped to the conclusion that it clearly appears that the allegations against the Magistrate are substantiated, and therefore the order passed by the Magistrate should be interfered with. Not only that the learned Judge has accepted the allegations made but also directed for instituting a departmental enquiry against the Magistrate concerned, after placing him under suspension.
4. This observation and direction of the learned Judge on the basis of allegations made in a petition cannot be sustained, and we have, therefore, no hesitation to expunge the so-called observation and direction of the learned Judge while passing order on 6-11-1997 in Criminal Miscellaneous Petition No. 520 of 1996. So far as the legality of the order passed by the learned Judge is concerned, it remains to be examined in Criminal Appeal No. 439 of 1998 which has been tiled by the accused Bhagirath, which is pending before this Court.
The present appeal is allowed to the extent indicated above.
Appeal allowed.
