Raju Trambak Magare and Others v State of Maharashtra
Supreme Court of India

12 December 2000
Cr.As. No. 1071 of 1999 With No. 1072 of 1999
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  In. Sessions Case No. 89 of 1986 the Additional Sessions Judge, Jalgaon convicted the accused-appellants u/s. 302 read with S. 34 IPC and sentenced them to undergo rigorous imprisonment for life and to pay a fine of Rs. 3000 each and in default in the payment of fine, to suffer further rigorous imprisonment for one year. Against the said judgment and order the appellants preferred Criminal Appeal No. 94 of 1994 in the High Court of Judicature at Bombay which was dismissed by the judgment and order dated 3-8-1998, 4-8-1998, 5-8-1998 and 10-8-1998. That judgment and order is challenged by the accused by filing these appeals. Original Accused 2, 3 and 4 have filed Criminal Appeal No. 1071 of 1999 and Accused 1 has filed Criminal Appeal No. 1072 of 1999.
2.  It is the prosecution story that information was received at Police Station Bazar Peth, Bhusaval that one person by the name of Rashid @ Bhurya, son of Babu Tadvi was brought to the hospital and he was dead. As per the prosecution version the incident took place on 4-2-1986 at about 7.00 p.m. because Accused 1 Laxman Kautik Soyanke started abusing the persons of the Muslim community in general. The deceased Rashid asked Accused 1 Laxman as to why he was abusing the Muslim community in general. Hence Accused 1 got enraged. He and Accused 4 Rahul Shankar Sonawane caught hold of the deceased Rashid and dragged him towards the house of one Raheman Murgiwala. When they took deceased Rashid near the house of Raheman Murgiwala Accused 1 and 4 were still holding the deceased and Accused 1 asked the other persons who were present there to assault the deceased.
3. Thereafter, Accused 2 Raju Trambak Magare armed with a knife, dealt a blow on the person of Rashid causing him bleeding injury. Soon thereafter Accused 3 Ravindra Parashram Kamble who was armed with a gupti gave blows by the gupti, thereby causing injury to Rashid. Having received injuries Rashid fell down on the ground and it is alleged that Accused 7 Sanjay Trambak Magare who was having a steel rod gave several blows on the person of the deceased. Similarly, other persons also gave stickblows or blows by iron rods. As the people gathered there and intervened the accused persons fled away.
4.  On receipt of information at the police station PSI Waghare directed PSI Kadanor to go to the hospital and record the FIR. Accordingly, PSI Kadanor went to the hospital and recorded the information given by the father of the deceased Babu Tadvi wherein he has stated that he was having five sons and at about 7.00 p.m. his son Rashid had gone out. Thereafter, immediately his other son Raju came running after some time and stated that 13 persons named therein had surrounded his brother Rashid and they were carrying weapons like knives. Hence he along with his wife and son Saleem Babu went running towards the mutton market and there he found his son Rashid lying in front of the house of Laxman. They took him to Municipal Hospital in a rickshaw. In the hospital Dr. Umap examined him and, said that on account of injury Rashid had died at about 7.40 p.m.
5.  It is the say of PW 10 Pandharinath R. Maghare who was attached to Police Station Bazar Peth of Bhusaval that on 4-2-1986 when he was on duty he received intimation in writing from Municipal Hospital, Bhusaval that the dead body of Rashid was brought to the hospital and therefore he directed PSI Kadanor to visit the hospital and obtain complaint in writing from the father of Rashid and at the same time he received a telephonic message from Police Constable Gokul Shankar that marpeet is going on in Shivaji Nagar locality. Therefore, he deputed PSI Gavali and the police staff to proceed to that place for bandobast. After some time Accused 2 Raju Trambak Magare, Accused 5 Vilas Trambak Magare and one Ganga Ram came to the police station in an injured condition. He referred them to Municipal Hospital, Bhusaval along with requisition. He has further stated that at about 9.45 p.m. the policeman of the cycle squad produced before him Accused 1 to 12 who were arrested by him. On the next day i.e. 5-2-1986 he went to the hospital and drew inquest panchnama. Thereafter, he went to the scene of offence and prepared the panchnama for the same. During the course of panchnama he seized two cycles lying in front of the house of Accused 1 Laxman and one wooden cot lying in front of the house of Akbar.
6. Subsequently, he recorded the statements of 14 witnesses. Thereafter he recorded the panchnama of the clothes of the deceased. On the next day i.e. 6-2-1986 he recorded the statement of some more witnesses. On 7-2-1986 he recovered mudammal articles from the accused after preparing necessary panchnamas. After completing the investigation the accused were charge-sheeted before the trial court and subsequently committed to the Sessions Court.
7.  By judgment and order dated 19-2-1994 the Additional Sessions Judge, Jalgaon arrived at the conclusion that Accused 1 to 4 were liable to be convicted and the remaining accused were entitled to get benefit of doubt. He further held that the accused were liable to be convicted on the ground that they were members of an unlawful assembly consisting of 5 members and more and two of them were armed with deadly weapons like knife and gupti. He therefore convicted them for the offences punishable u/s. 302 read with S. 149 IPC and imposed sentence as stated above. In appeal, the High Court confirmed the conviction but set aside the conviction u/s. 148 or u/s. 149. The High Court held that the accused were liable to be convicted u/s. 302 read with S. 34 of the Indian Penal Code.
8.  Mr. Sushil Kumar, the learned Senior Counsel appearing for Accused 2 and 3 submitted that at the initial stage the prosecution brought out the story of riots, but failed to bring any evidence on record for that purpose. Thereafter, it suppressed the genesis of the entire story and examined a few witnesses who have narrated only one part of the incident without disclosing how the incident took place and who caused the injuries to the appellants Accused 2 and 3 as well as acquitted Accused 5 Vilas Trambak Magare and one deceased Ganga Ram. He has also submitted that the prosecution has failed to prove the motive. It is his contention that the investigation carried out by the police was one-sided as the investigating officer had not examined the material witnesses on the date of incident or on the next date i.e. on 5-2-1986 and therefore the courts below materially erred in relying upon the one-sided improved version given by the prosecution witnesses PWs 4, 6 and 8. He also pointed out that the accused after receiving injuries went to the police station for lodging FIR. This also indicates that the accused were not the aggressors and that incident had not occurred in the manner as stated by the prosecution witnesses.
9.  Mr. R. Sundaravaradan, the learned Senior Counsel appearing for Accused 1 and 4 submitted that considering the prosecution version as it is, there is no evidence on record for drawing inference that Accused 1 and 4 shared any common intention for convicting them for the offence punishable u/s. 302 read with S. 34 IPC. He pointed out that the incident took place as alleged by the prosecution witnesses on a trivial matter, namely, Accused 1 abusing the Muslim community in general and the deceased Rashid objected to the said utterances. Neither were Accused 1 or 4 armed with any weapon nor were they knowing that Accused 2 and 3 were armed with either a knife or gupti.
10.  As against this, Mr. I. G. Shah, the learned Senior Counsel appearing for the respondent submitted that the trial court as well as the High Court have considered the entire evidence led by the prosecution and after giving benefit of doubt to the rest of the 11 accused, only four persons to whom specific role is assigned and proved by the witnesses are convicted. It is his contention that there is no manifest error committed by the High Court or the trial court in convicting the appellants and, therefore, the appeals should be dismissed.
11.  For appreciating the contentions raised by the learned Senior Counsel for the parties, we would first refer to the evidence of PW 6 Enurbee who is a resident of the locality in which the incident had taken place. She has deposed that at about 7.00 to 7.30 p.m. when she was sitting at the house of her niece Sharifabi she heard shouts from the side of the road. There she saw that Accused 1 Laxman and Accused 4 Rahul had caught hold of the deceased Rashid. It is her say that along with Accused 1 and 4 other accused were also present. At that time Accused 2 was having a knife and Accused 3 Ravindra was having a gupti. Accused Laxman was abusing the Muslim community and therefore Rashid asked that he should not abuse the community. She asked Accused 1 and 4 not to quarrel. Subsequently, Accused 1 and 4 dragged deceased Rashid near the house of Raheman Murgiwala and Accused 1 shouted that Rashid should be beaten. Thereafter, Accused 2 Raju Trambak Magare gave a knife-blow at the left side of the chest of Rashid and Accused 3 Rahul dealt a gupti-blow near the waist of Rashid. All the remaining accused thereafter started beating Rashid by sticks and/or steel rods. Her statement was recorded on 6-2-1986. In cross-examination she has stated that before the incident there was no quarrel between Rashid and Accused 1 and that she was not knowing the reason for the quarrel on that day.
12. She has further stated that she was not present at the spot till the assailants ran away. The aforesaid prosecution story that Accused 1 and 4 caught hold of deceased Rashid is also stated by PW 4 Raheman. He has also stated that Raju gave a knife-blow on the person of the deceased and accused Rahul dealt 2-3 gupti-blows on the person of Rashid. After receiving injuries the deceased fell down and thereafter the other accused assaulted the deceased with sticks or steel rods. In his cross-examination he has specifically stated that he did not see deceased Rashid assaulting Accused 2 Raju by a weapon like a knife or gupti. He has also specifically stated that Rashid was assaulted in his presence at a distance of 5 to 6 feet from the electric lamp-post near his house and was not knowing whether anything had taken place near the house of Accused 1 Laxman. In further cross-examination he has stated that he was not knowing the reason for the marpeet and that he came out of the house after starting of the quarrel. The other evidence led by the prosecution is that of one Mohd. Habib, PW 5, who is also a resident of the same locality where the incident had taken place. He has also repeated the same version as stated by PW 6. In his cross-examination he has stated that he had not seen deceased Rashid assaulting anybody in exercise of his right of private defence. Nor had he seen any other person assaulting the said accused in order to save Rashid. It is his say that his statement was recorded by the police on the next day of the incident. The High Court has not relied upon the evidence of PW 7 and, therefore, we are not inclined to deal with it.
13.  Considering the aforesaid evidence produced on record it is apparent that the incident took place all of a sudden because Accused 1 was abusing the Muslim community in general. That was objected to by the deceased Rashid. Consequently, Rashid was given blows by Accused 2 and 3 as stated by the prosecution witnesses. Injury to the deceased by a knife or gupti is probabilised by the medical evidence and in the post-mortem report it has been specifically mentioned that the deceased was having as many as 4 stab wounds and 3 incised wounds. According to Dr. Sheshrao, PW 9, who conducted the post-mortem examination, Injuries 1, 3 and 4 were sufficient to cause instant death. He has also stated that by describing some injuries as stab injuries and some as incised wounds the type of weapons used for causing such injuries cannot be distinguished between pointed cutting weapon or sharp weapon. This witness had also examined Accused 2 Raju and acquitted accused Vilas Trambak Magare and one Ganga Ram on the day of the incident and he had found the following injuries on their person:
"... On examination of Raju, following injuries were found on his person :
(1) Oblique incised wound 1"x 1/4" x 1/4" on left clavicular region of chest, middle part.
It was caused within 3 hours and was caused by sharp-cutting instrument.
I accordingly issued the injury report. The contents therein are correct. It bears my signature and it is Ext. 58.
On the same day at about 8.50 p.m. I examined Accused 5 Vilas Trambak Magare. He had brought with him the police requisite letter. On examination following injuries were found :
(1) Abrasion 1/2"x 1/4" x 1/4 "on front of right leg.
(2) Abrasion 1/4"x 1/4" on back of right middle finger 1/4"x 1/4" on back of right ring finger.
(3) Abrasion 1/2"x 1/4" on back of left hand.
(4) Abrasion 1/2"x 1/4" on back of left thigh.
(5) Contusion 2 1/2" x 2"on middle front of left forearm.
(6) Abrasion transverse 4" x 1/2 "on upper part of back, both sides in centre.
The injuries could have been caused by stone, steel rods and sticks. I accordingly issued the injury report. The contents therein are correct. It bears my signature. It is Ext. 59.
At 8.30 on the same day I examined Ganga Ram Fula Gavhane and found the following injuries on his person :
(1) Tenderness on left side of chest.
(2) Lacerated wound 2" x 1/2"x 1/4" on left parietal region of head .... "He has also examined Accused 3 and issued certificate Ext. 61 to the following effect :"... He has been treated at this dispensary for the following :
1. Caused abrasion on the left lower lip 1/4"x 3/4".
2. Abrasion on the left forearm, lower part 3"x 1/4".
3. Abrasion on the left index finger, 1st phalange posterolateral 1/2"x 1/4".
4. Abrasion on the left middle posterior 1st phalange posterolateral 3/4"x 1/2".
5. Abrasion on the left ring finger, 1st phalange 1/2"x 1/4". "
14.  The learned counsel for the accused submitted that considering the injuries received by Accused 2, 3, 5 and the deceased Ganga Ram during the course of the incident and the fact that there is no mention by the prosecution witnesses with regard to the assault on the accused, it would clearly reveal that there is total suppression of material facts and the genesis of the incident. It is, therefore, pointed out that the trial court as well as the High Court manifestly erred in reconstructing the prosecution story by relying upon the improved version given by PW 6 and PW 8.
15. It is also pointed out that after receiving injuries the accused had gone to the police station and lodged the FIR. In support of his contention, Shri Sushil Kumar, the learned Senior Counsel referred to the decision of this Court in the case of Lakshmi Singh v. State of Bihar  .
16.  Before referring to the aforesaid decision, we would state that as opined by the doctor the injuries received by Accused 2, 3 and 5 were minor injuries. Apart from being minor injuries it would be difficult to arrive at the conclusion that there is suppression on the part of the witnesses with regard to the injuries received by the accused. It is true that in the present case the prosecution has not proved previous incident or enmity between Accused 1 and other persons of the Muslim community. For the incident which had taken place on 4-2-1986 it is the say of the prosecution witnesses that the incident started all of a sudden when Accused 1 abused the Muslim community in general and deceased Rashid objected to the said abuse. Further there is nothing on record to establish that PWs 5, 6 and 8 are interested witnesses. On the contrary, it is proved that they are residents of the same locality and they came out after hearing the hubbub of quarrel between Accused 1 and Rashid.
17. In Lakshmi Singh case  after considering the various decisions this Court observed that the omission on the part of the prosecution to explain injuries on the persons of the accused assumes greater importance where the evidence consists of interested or inimical witnesses or where the defence gives a version which competes in probability with that of the prosecution one. It is to be stated that in the present case there is nothing on record to arrive at the conclusion that the prosecution witnesses are in any way interested or inimical towards the accused. Nor is there any defence version which competes in probability with that of the prosecution. As such almost all the accused have denied the prosecution version and have not stated anything else except that Accused 1 and 4 submitted that they were not present at the scene of occurrence.
18.  In the case of Lakshmi Singh  the Court has found that accused Dasrath Singh had received serious injuries during the incident which had not been explained by the prosecution. In that set of circumstances the Court held that it would be difficult to rely upon the evidence of prosecution witnesses when some of these witnesses had lied by stating that they did not see any injury on the person of the accused. The Court added and observed thus:
"We must hasten to add that as held by this Court in State of Gujarat v. Bai Fatima  there may be cases where the non-explanation of the injuries by the prosecution may not affect the prosecution case.
19. This principle would obviously apply to cases where the injuries sustained by the accused are minor and superficial or where the evidence is so clear and cogent, so independent and disinterested, so probable, consistent and creditworthy, that it far outweighs the effect of the omission on the part of the prosecution to explain the injuries.
"In our view, same would be the position in the present case and omission, if any, on the part of disinterested witnesses far outweighs the effect of non-explanation of injuries to the accused."
20.  Further it has come in evidence of PSI that after receiving information from Municipal Hospital that the dead body of Rashid was received, he received further information that still marpeet was going on at the place of incident. For that purpose he sent the other police PSI and police constables at the scene of the occurrence. Now in that set of circumstances if something had happened after the deceased was taken to the hospital it would be difficult to hold that the prosecution have suppressed the genesis of the incident. The immediate genesis of the incident was solely because Accused 1 abused the Muslim community in general.
21.  The learned Senior Counsel contended that the trial court and the High Court have reconstructed the prosecution version and in support of this contention he has referred to the decision in Ugar Ahir v. State of Bihar  wherein this Court observed : The maxim falsus in uno, falsus in omnibus (false in one thing, false in everything is neither a sound rule of law nor a rule of practice. Hardly one comes across a witness whose evidence does not contain a grain of untruth or at any rate exaggerations, embroideries or embellishments. It is, therefore, the duty of the court to scrutinise the evidence carefully and, in terms of the felicitous metaphor, separate the grain from the chaff. But, it cannot obviously disbelieve the substratum of the prosecution case or the material parts of the evidence and reconstruct a story of its own out of the rest. That is what the courts have done in this case.
"In effect, the courts disbelieved practically the whole version given by the witnesses in regard to the pursuit, the assault on the deceased with lathis, the accused going on a bicycle, and the deceased wresting the bhala from one of the appellants and attacking with the same two of the appellants, the case that the accused attacked the witnesses, and the assertion of the witnesses of their being disinterested spectators. If all this was disbelieved, what else remained ? To reverse the metaphor, the courts removed the grain and accepted the chaff and convicted the appellants."
22.  As stated above, in the present case the facts are entirely different. The courts below have not disbelieved the entire prosecution version. It is true that with regard to the assault by the acquitted accused, the courts have given benefit of doubt, but with regard to the assault by Accused 2 and 3, the prosecution story is consistent and fully corroborated by the medical evidence and there is no question of reconstructing the entire prosecution version. It would be difficult to hold that the courts below removed the grain and accepted the chaff and convicted the appellants. On the contrary the courts have cleared the grains by removing the chaff.
23.  In this view of the matter, it would be difficult to hold that the courts committed error in convicting Accused 2 and 3. The role assigned to them by the prosecution witnesses is a specific, clear, consistent and cogent one.
24.  The next question would be as to whether Accused 1 and 4 would be liable to be convicted. It has been pointed out that Accused 1 and 4 were unarmed. It is also the prosecution version that they had not taken any part in assaulting the deceased. As alleged, Accused 1 and 4 dragged the deceased at some distance from the front of the house of Sharifabi to the house of Raheman Murgiwala. It is also admitted that the incident took place all of a sudden. There is nothing on record from which it can be inferred that A-1 or A-4 were knowing that A-2 and A-3 were armed with deadly weapons. There is nothing on record to show that when A-2 and A-3 came at the scene of offence they were accompanied by A-1 and A-4. It is true that the prosecution witnesses have alleged that Accused 1 shouted that Rashid should be beaten.
25. But from the alleged word "beat" used by Accused 1, it is not possible to arrive at the conclusion that Accused 1 shared any common intention with A-2 and A-3 of murdering Rashid. As stated above, it is the prosecution version that the incident took place all of a sudden and there is no other circumstance from which it can be inferred that Accused 1 and 4 shared any common intention with Accused 2 and 3 or that the assault was by A-2 and A-3 in furtherance of the common intention of all the accused. It appears that the High Court has not considered this aspect before convicting Accused 1 and 4. 12-12-2000
26.  Today we have heard the learned counsel for A-2 and A-3 with regard to the offence committed by them. Considering the facts found by us, it is apparent that the prosecution story with regard to assault by Accused 2 and 3 by knife - and gupti-blows is clear, consistent and cogent. They were armed with deadly weapons and gave fatal blows to the deceased. In that set of circumstances, it would be apparent that there was a common intention on their part. Hence Accused 2 and 3 are rightly convicted by the High Court u/s. 302 read with S. 34 IPC.
27.  In the result, Criminal Appeal No. 1072 of 1999 filed by Accused 1 (Laxman Kautik Soyanke) is allowed and he is acquitted. The bail bonds shall stand discharged. Criminal Appeal No. 1071 of 1999 insofar as it relates to A-4 (Rahul Shankar Sonawane) is allowed; he is acquitted. The bail bond shall stand discharged. Insofar as the appeal relates to A-2 (Raju Trambak Magare) and A-3 (Ravindra Parashram Kamble), it is dismissed.
Appeals disposed of.
