P. Eknath v Y. Amaranatha Reddy @ Babu and another
Supreme Court of India

9 February 2017
Criminal Appeal No. 1792 of 2013
The Judgment was delivered by : Pinaki Chandra Ghose, J.
1. This appeal, filed by the appellant/Complainant is directed against the judgment and order dated 17.08.2012 passed by the Division Bench of the High Court of Andhra Pradesh at Hyderabad, whereby the High Court allowed the appeal filed by the accused (Respondent No.1 herein) and set aside the conviction and sent.ence imposed by the trial Court for the offences punishable under Sections 302, 307 and 324 IPC and acquitted him of the charges.
2. This case pertains to double murder of the deceased Pasupuleti Lohita, aged 12 years and the deceased Pasupuleti Venkatramana, aged 50 years and double life attempts on Pasupuleti Chandrakala and Pasupuleti Eknath, all residents of Prasanth Nagar, Madanapalle, and theft in the dwelling house by the sole accused Yerraballi Amaranatha Reddy @ Babu Reddy-Respondent No.1 herein.
3. The relevant facts which are necessary for the purpose of deciding this appeal are narrated hereunder:
4. According to the case of the prosecution, on 18.09.2005, at about 10.00 p.m., the accused went to the house of P. Venkatramana (the deceased No.2) along with a sickle. While the deceased No.2 and the accused were talking and when the others had retired for the night, at about 1.30 a.m., the accused took out the sickle and attacked the deceased No.2 and hacked him indiscriminately. When,
P.W. 2 wife of deceased No.2 tried to intervene, he attacked her too and caused severe bleeding injuries.
5. P.W.1 (son of deceased No.2) witnessed the incident, and called his brother P.W.3 on the phone and informed him about the incident. As P.W.3 was sleeping, he could not understand the message of P.W.1, so he called back. The accused lifted the phone and heard P.W.1 talking to P.W.3 and went to the bedroom of P.W.1 and attacked him and caused injuries which led to bleeding. When the deceased No.1 tried to run down the stairs, the accused caught her on the staircase and hacked her to death. Meanwhile, P.W.1 locked the doors of his bedroom. The accused also committed theft of Rs.2,500/- from the shirt of the deceased.
6. On the information furnished by P.W.3, police came to the scene of offence and recorded the statement of P.W.1 and Crime No. 115 of 2005 under Sections 302 and 307 IPC was registered. P.W.23 held inquest over the dead body of the deceased No.1 and got the scene of offence photographed and sent the deceased No.2 and P.W.2 to the hospital for treatment. While undergoing treatment, deceased No.2 died in the hospital and an inquest was held on his dead body. The body was also sent for postmortem examination.
7. On 15.10.2005, P.W. 23 arrested the accused and recorded his confessional statement in the presence of P.Ws 11 and 12 and seized the sickle used in the commission of offence at his instance. The accused also showed the place where he burned his blood stained shirt.
8. P.W. 13 doctor, who conducted the autopsy over the dead body of the deceased No.1, opined that the deceased died due to injury to skull bones, cervical vertebrae leading to internal and external haemorrhage, shock and death. P.W. 14, the doctor who conducted the autopsy over the dead body of the deceased No. 2, opined that the deceased would appear to have died due to shock and haemorrhage due to multiple injuries to the vital organs by a sharp object. P.W. 23 sent the material objects to FSL for examination and on receipt of the report from the FSL and on completion of the investigation, filed a charge sheet against the accused. The learned Sessions Judge has framed charges under Sections 302, 307 and 380 IPC against the accused.
9. In order to establish the said charges, the prosecution examined P.Ws 1 to 23. The trial Court, after taking into consideration the evidence adduced, both oral and documentary, held that the prosecution has been able to establish the guilt of the accused beyond reasonable doubt, and convicted the appellant for offences punishable under Sections 302, 307 and 324 IPC and sentenced him to undergo imprisonment for life and to also to pay a fine of Rs. 5,000 with default stipulation.
10. Being aggrieved, the accused preferred an appeal before the High Court and the said Court, after hearing the parties, allowed the appeal and set aside the conviction and sentence imposed by the trial Court for the offences punishable under Sections 302, 307 and 324 IPC and acquitted him.
11. The appellant-Complainant preferred this appeal, by way of special leave.
12. We have heard Mr. Suyodhan Byrapaneni, the learned counsel appearing for the appellant-Complainant and Mr. V. Sridhar Reddy, learned counsel appearing for the accused/Respondent No.1 and Mr. Guntur Prabhakar, the learned counsel appearing for the State at considerable length.
13. Learned counsel appearing for the appellant contended that the High Court erred in acquitting the accused without taking into consideration the well reasoned judgment of the Trial Court completely ignoring the evidences of P.Ws 1 and 2, who were the eyewitnesses and also the injured witnesses in the incident.
14. Per contra, learned counsel appearing for the accused contended that the High Court is right in coming to its conclusion by observing that the prosecution has failed to establish the motive for the commission of offence by the accused.
15. After hearing the contentions of the parties and carefully perusing the records of the case and after going through the judgments of both the trial Court as well as the High Court, it appears to us that except motive, the High Court has not given any other plausible reasons for setting aside the well reasoned order of the Trial Court.
16. Further, after going through the evidence which has been placed before us, there is no reason to disbelieve the evidence of PWs 1 and 2 who are injured eye witnesses. The High Court has not even taken into account the evidence of PWs 20, 21 and 22 who just after the incident came to the spot in question.
17. We have also considered the sketch of the spot which has been shown to us, and there is no doubt that deceased No.2 died on the ground floor, lying in a pool of blood, and the daughter who is 12 years old, was also lying dead in the middle of the staircase.
18. It further appears that the reason behind this is that some loan was taken by the accused and was not returned to the deceased No.2 victim as a result whereof these ghastly murders have taken place.
19. The evidence which has been put forward by doctor P.W.14 who conducted the autopsy on the dead body of the deceased No.2, as well as the other doctor P.W.13 who further conducted autopsy over the dead body of the deceased No.1 clearly shows that all injuries were of a shart edged weapon. In our considered opinion, there is no discrepancy with regard to the ocular evidence or the evidence of the doctors who deposed before the Court. The weapon (sickle) which was used by the accused was recovered at the instance of the accused himself. The said sickle also contained human blood in terms of the FSL Report which was produced before the Court at the time of hearing of the matter in question.
20. After taking into consideration and summing it up together, it appears to us that the High Court did not take into account all these facts which were brought before us had been placed before the High Court at the time of hearing of the appeal.
21. We have been able to find out from the material available on record that the accused had the requisite motive for committing the offence and the weapon used i.e. sickle can be convincingly linked to the injuries caused on the deceased. The FSL report, credibility of witnesses, foot prints of the offender, narration of incident by the circumstantial witness, identification of the accused/weapon, presence of light in the murder scene, all leads to the guilt of the accused.
22. Learned counsel for the respondent cited before us some judgments which, in our opinion, cannot be helpful to the respondent in the facts and circumstances of this case.
23. In our opinion, the High Court has failed to appreciate such evidence which was brought before the Court and further the facts which ought to have been taken into consideration at the time of the matter to be decided by the High Court and without giving any reasons, set aside the well reasoned order of the Trial Court.
24. Therefore, the order passed by the High Court is perverse and not sustainable in the eyes of law and we set aside the order passed by it affirming the order passed by the trial Court.
25. Accordingly, the appeal is allowed.
26. We direct the concerned Police Authorities to take custody of the respondent forthwith to serve out the remainder of sentence imposed by the Trial Court.
Order accordingly
