Rajasthan State Road Transport Corporation and others v Gurudas Singh
Supreme Court of India

17 September 2004
C.As. Nos. 6107-08 of 2004 (Arising out of S.L.Ps. (C) Nos. 5256-57 of 2002)
The Judgment was delivered by: Arijit Pasayat, J.
Leave granted.
Heard learned counsel for the parties.
1.  The Rajasthan State Road Transport Corporation (hereinafter referred to as "the Corporation") calls in question legality of the judgment rendered by a learned Single Judge of the Rajasthan High Court, Jaipur Bench, Jaipur holding that the respondent's dismissal from service was invalid. By the impugned order dated 31-5-2001 two second appeals under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (in short "CPC") were disposed of.
2. The basic issues were that the respondent was appointed in the Corporation by an order issued by the Divisional Manager. Subsequently, his services were terminated by order passed by the Depot Manager. A suit was filed for declaration that the dismissal was invalid, illegal and contrary to the principles of natural justice.
3.  The trial court decreed the suit by judgment and decree dated 27-8- 1994 and held that the dismissal was invalid, illegal and contrary to the principles of natural justice. The Corporation was directed to take back the respondent into service and financial benefits were granted from the date of institution of the suit. The respondent who was the plaintiff in the suit filed an appeal and prayed that financial benefits should be allowed from the date of dismissal i.e. 11-8-1987. The Corporation also filed an appeal and took the stand that the dismissal was in order and the judgment and decree passed by the trial court were illegal.
4. The first appellate court disposed of both the appeals by judgment dated 25-4-1997 and held that the direction for reinstatement cannot be faulted; but held that the plaintiff (the respondent herein) was not entitled to get any financial benefits. Both the respondent and the Corporation filed appeals before the High Court. By the impugned judgment, the High Court disposed of both the appeals deciding in favour of the respondent primarily on the ground that he was protected by Article 311(1) of the Constitution.
5.  The stand of the appellant Corporation is that in order to bring in application of Article 311 it has to be shown that the person concerned was a civil servant, he was a member of the civil service of the Union or an all India service or a civil service of the State and holds a civil post under the Union or a State. It was not established by the respondent at any stage that he is entitled to the protection under Article 311(1) of the Constitution.
6.  The foundation of the declaration for grant of relief so far as the respondent is concerned is apparently founded on Article 311 of the Constitution. Sub-article (1) of Article 311 reads as follows:
"311. (1) No person who is a member of a civil service of the Union or an all-India service or a civil service of a State or holds a civil post under the Union or a State shall be dismissed or removed by an authority subordinate to that by which he was appointed."
7.  A bare reading of the aforesaid provision in the Constitution shows that it is applicable only to a member of civil service or the Union or all-India service or civil service of a State or a person holding civil post under the Union or a State.
8.  For the purpose of Article 12 the Corporation may be treated as an "authority" for the purpose of being subject to Part III of the Constitution.
9.  In Som Prakash Rekhi v. Union of India  1980 Indlaw SC 227 this Court categorically observed that Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd. was a limb of Government, an agency of the State, a vicarious creature of the statute working on the wheels of the Acquisition Act.
10. It was however held that the conclusion does not mean that for the purpose of Article 309 or otherwise, the aforesaid government company is a State and it was limited to Article 12 and Part III of the Constitution.
11.  Judged in the light of the decisions of the two Constitution Bench decisions referred to above, the inevitable conclusion is that the respondent was not entitled to protection under Article 311 of the Constitution. Article 311 occurs in Part XIV of the Constitution which deals with "Services under the Union and the States" and more specifically in Chapter I of that part which deals with "Services".
12. The heading of the article reads "Dismissal, removal or reduction in rank of persons employed in civil capacities under the Union or State". The text of the article refers to members of civil services of the Union or an all-India service or a civil service or a civil post under the Union or a State. A Constitution Bench of this Court in S.L. Agarwal (Dr.) v. G.M., Hindustan Steel Ltd.  1969 Indlaw SC 36 considered as to who are the persons entitled to the protection of Article 311.
13.  In State of Assam v. Kanak Chandra Dutta  1966 Indlaw SC 296 also applicable tests were indicated by a Constitution Bench.
Above being the position, the view expressed by the trial court to direct the reinstatement of the respondent as affirmed by the first appellate court and the High Court cannot be maintained. But, at this juncture learned counsel for the respondent brought to our notice the order dated 15-1-1998 passed in batch of cases where employees similarly placed as the respondent, who were the parties in suits filed in different courts of Rajasthan were given the benefit of reinstatement.
14.  Following the said order we direct that the order of reinstatement which is stated to have been given effect to, shall be operative. But the respondent shall not be entitled to back wages. If, however, the back wages have been paid, they shall not be recovered. The appeals are disposed of accordingly. No costs.
Appeals disposed of.
