State of Bihar v Purushottam Singh and Another
Supreme Court of India

17 November 2000
Cr.As. Nos. 992 to 995 of 2000.
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Leave granted.
Heard the learned counsel for the parties.
1.  The respondents in these appeals approached the High Court for quashing the criminal proceedings including the order dated 5-1-1996 passed by the Special Judge, Vigilance, whereby he has directed to frame charges against the accused persons for offences punishable under Sections 420, 201 read with Section 120-B of the Indian Penal Code as well as under Sections 13(1) and 13(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act.
2. Those petitions were allowed by the learned Single Judge of the High Court solely on the ground that the accused persons have been exonerated of the charges in the departmental proceedings and for the same cause of action the accused cannot be prosecuted.
3.  That order is under challenge before this Court. It has been pointed out on behalf of the State that voluminous material is collected by the investigating agency and the Electricity Board has not exonerated the persons concerned. Hence, there was no question of quashing the proceedings.
4. In any case, the learned counsel submitted that without considering such record, the High Court ought not to have passed the impugned order.
5.  In our view, the submission of the learned counsel for the appellant requires to be accepted. The High Court ought to have gone through the material to find out whether prima facie, there was sufficient material to frame the charges. In this view of the matter, the impugned order passed by the High Court is set aside. The appeals are allowed.
6. The petitions are restored on the file of the High Court and the matters are remanded back to the High Court. The High Court is requested to decide afresh the petitions in accordance with law. It would be open to the parties to raise all the contentions which they are entitled to raise. The appeals are disposed of accordingly.
Appeals disposed of.
