Shoukat Beg v State of Madhya Pradesh
Supreme Court of India

10 September 1986
Cr.A. No. 241 of 1977
The order of the court was as follows:
1.  Appellant Shoukat Beg who was a Patwari, has been convicted by the Special Judge, Jhabua by his judgment and sentence dated February 22, 1975 for having committed an offence punishable under Section 5 (1) (d) read with Section 5 (2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947 and under Section 161 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 and sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for a period of 1 1/2 years and to pay a fine of Rs. 2000 or in default, to further rigorous imprisonment for a period of 4 years on each count.
2.   The substantive sentences of imprisonment are to run concurrently. The conviction and sentence have been upheld by the Madhya Pradesh High Court by its judgment dated July 20, 1977.
3.  The only contention advanced in the appeal is one of sentence. In a case like the present we agree with the High Court that the sentence must be deterrent. The gravamen of the charge against the appellant was that he as the Patwari received Rs. 4880 as a motive or reward from certain cultivators whose lands had been acquired by the government for construction of a well under the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 for helping them to get their cheques encased from the State Bank, Jhabua.
4.   At first he made a demand for payment of half of the compensation amount but later agreed to accept whatever was paid and asked the cultivators to be present at the Bank. After encashment of the cheques the appellant collected various amounts ranging from Rs. 300 to Rs. 900 from each of the landowners and put the money in a white bag. After the money had changed hands, the raiding party reached the spot in a jeep.
5.   When he saw the raiding party, the appellant tried to escape but was given a chase. The appellant while running, threw the bag into a well. Eventually, the police officers apprehended him at some distance from the State Bank and the bag was retrieved from the well.
6.  In the circumstances, learned counsel for the appellant placing reliance on Bhagwandas Keshwani v. State of Rajasthan pleads for mercy saying that the appellant has gained nothing but suffered loss in many ways.
7.   In the first place, the entire amount was recovered by the police party, the appellant had then to undergo a protected trial for over four years and thereafter was dismissed from service.  Furthermore, the learned counsel says that for the last about 10 years the appellant is without a job and reduced to almost penury and has a starving family consisting of his wife and small children and there is no one to look after them. The learned counsel also states that the appellant has already paid the full amount of fine on both the counts.
8.  We are not at all impressed with any of the submissions. The appellant well merited the sentence of rigorous imprisonment for 1 1/2 years. However, looking to the fact that the incident occurred on October 30, 1973 i. e. some 13 years back, as an act of mercy, we reduce the substantive sentence of rigorous imprisonment for 1 1/2 years to rigorous imprisonment for a period of one year on each count. The sentence of fine is maintained.
9.  Subject to this modification in the sentence, the appeal fails and is dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.
