Technical Employees' Association of Railways and another v Ministry of Railways and others
Supreme Court of India

31 March 2000
W.P. (C) No. 289 of 1999
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  The Technical Employees' Association of Railways through its President is the petitioner here assailing the validity of circular dated 28-9-1998 issued by the Railway Board.
2.  We entertained this petition u/art. 32 of the Constitution even though the petitioner could have approached the High Court merely because employees of the Railways are from different parts of the country. The circular in question which is being assailed provides that for promotion from the post of Khalasi the higher qualification of matriculation and ITI pass should be achieved.
3.  The petitioner's contention is that Khalasi who are already in service, did not possess the aforesaid qualification and if such a circular is allowed to operate, there will be stagnation and, therefore, the impugned circular be quashed being hit by Arts. 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India. Prescribing higher qualification for the purpose of promotion whether permissible under law no longer remains res integra.
4. As early as in the case of Union of India v. S.B. Kohli (Dr) 1972 Indlaw SC 307 in a matter relating to the Central Health Service Rules, this Court has held that it would be open for the employer to prescribe qualifications both for direct recruitment as well as for promotion. To the same effect, the judgment of this Court in Mohd. Shujat Ali v. Union of India 1974 Indlaw SC 5 and the decision of this Court in T.R. Kothandaraman v. T.N. Water Supply & Drainage Board, 1994 Indlaw SC 1022.
5.  For maintaining efficiency of service, the higher qualification is required for discharge of the duties in the higher positions and therefore, prescribing such qualifications cannot be held to be arbitrary or irrational. In the case in hand, the Board has issued circular in consonance with the recommendation of the Pay Commission. In that view of the matter, we see no infirmity with the impugned circular so as to be interfered with by this Court. The writ petition is accordingly dismissed.
Petition dismissed.
