Manik Chand v State of Madhya Pradesh
Supreme Court of India

18 November 2003
Cr.A. No.355 Of 1997
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  The appellant, along with two others faced trial for alleged commission of offences punishable under Section 302 and Section 307 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (in short, `the IPC') read with Section 34 
 IPC. The accusations which led to the trial of the accused persons was that on 18.08.1988, the accused persons knowingly and intentionally attacked Gopal (hereinafter referred to as the deceased) and murdered him. They connived with co-accused Hari, who was absconding to fulfill their common intention, deliberately assaulted Raj Kumar with sword and caused injuries on his person. Report was lodged at the police station by Udal, PW-1.
2.  The prosecution version as unfolded during trial was that on the night preceding the date of occurrence, the absconding accused Hari entered the house of one Vijay and misbehaved with his wife Guddi. When she cried out, he run away but was seen by her husband and father-in-law and a report about the incident was made at the police station by them. The deceased had also gone with them to the police station next day in the morning, A panchnama was prepared of the incident and deceased was one of the signatories. For this reason, there was an altercation between the deceased Gopal and Hari and on persuasion of Hari, Gopal destroyed the panchnama. When deceased was sitting outside on chabutra, accused appellants Manik Chand and Daya Ram came there. The accused Manik Chand was armed with a dagger, while Daya Ram was armed with a stick. The accused-appellant Manik Chand assaulted the deceased with his dagger at his chest and thigh and Daya Ram hit him with his stick. The deceased cried out and at that time Udal came out with a lathi along with Raj Kumar. In the meantime, accused Hari also came there with a sword and with intention to kill Raj Kumar, gave a blow on the head of Raj Kumar but he was saved as the blow ultimately landed on his arm. When PW-1 tried to intervene, the accused Manik Chand hit him with the dagger which hit his left hand paw.
3. Thereafter, all the accused persons ran away from the site of crime. The deceased was injured and lay for sometime in a still position, and subsequently breathed his last. PW-1 and Raj Kumar reported the matter to the police station and investigation was undertaken. On completion of investigation, charge-sheet was placed and the accused persons faced trial. They pleaded innocence and false implication. They took the positive stand that the real genesis of the dispute had been suppressed and in fact the complainant party had assaulted the accused persons and as a result accused-appellant Manik Chand had sustained serious injuries.
4.  Considering the evidence on record, the Trial Court found that the appellant was not guilty of the offence relatable to Section 302 
 IPC but was guilty under the Second part of Section 304 
 IPC. The other accused persons were held guilty of offences punishable under Section 323 IPC. The matter was carried in appeal by the accused-appellant alone because the other persons had suffered the custodial sentence imposed for the offence punishable under Section 323 IPC. The High Court noticed that though the evidence on record established that there were some unexplained injuries on the accused persons but that was not sufficient to disregard the cogent and credible evidence of the prosecution witnesses.
5. The High Court came to hold that even if there was a fight, as claimed, the accused persons had exceeded the right of private defence, if any, and, therefore, Manik Chand was rightly convicted under Section 304 Part-II IPC and the sentence of five years RI, as imposed, was not excessive or harsh in any manner.
6.  In support of the appeal, Mr. T.N. Singh, learned counsel for the appellant submitted that the serious injuries on the accused-appellant were not explained by the prosecution. That itself cast doubt on the veracity of its version. Additionally, it was further submitted that in a case of this nature, there cannot be any "Lakshman Rekha" upto the limit of which, the right of private defence can be exercised. It would all depend upon the circumstances of each case. It was residually submitted that the accused has undertone for about two years and considering the fact that the occurrence took place nearly 15 years back, it should be reduced to the period already undergone. In response, learned counsel for the respondent-State supported the judgment of the High Court affirming that of the Trial Court.
7.  The position of law relating to non-explanation of injuries on the accused has been highlighted by this Court in several judgments.
In The State of Gujarat
Vs.
8. Bai Fatima and Anr. and
Lakshmi Singh and Ors. Etc.
9. State of Bihar, it was noticed that in a situation where the prosecution fails to explain the injuries on the accused, depending on the facts of each case, three results may follow and one of the result is that the prosecution version is rendered doubtful and the charge against the accused cannot be held to be proved beyond reasonable doubt. The other extreme is that it may not affect the prosecution version at all where the failure on the part of the prosecution to explain the injuries on the person of the accused are of simple nature.
10. In Bai Fatima's case (supra), it was observed that the principle would obviously apply to cases where the injuries, as sustained by the accused are minor and superficial or where the evidence is so clear and cogent, so independent and trustworthy, so probable, consistent and trustworthy that it far outweighs the effect of failure on the part of the prosecution to explain the injuries. Where the prosecution fails to explain the injuries, the Court has to carefully scrutinies the evidence to find out whether reliance can be placed on the evidence as trustworthy or it totally lacks trustworthiness.
11.  On analysis of the factual position, both the Trial Court and the High Court have found that the evidence was credible and cogent. We do not find any infirmity in the conclusions so arrived at to warrant interference. The Trial Court had rightly convicted the accused for an offence relatable to Section 304 Part-II 
 IPC on the premise that though the plea of exercising right of private defence had some substance, yet, it exceeded the permissible limit of the exercise. The sentence of five years does not in any manner appear to be harsh or to be on the higher side. That being the position, we find no merit in this appeal, which is accordingly, dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.
