Ghana Pradhan and Others v State of Orissa
Supreme Court of India

13 November 1990
Cr.A. No. 716 of 1979
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1. This appeal is preferred against the judgment made in Government Appeal No. 39 of 1976 on the file of the High Court of Orissa. These two appellants along with two others, namely, Arakhita Pradhan and Pareswar Pradhan who were arrayed as accused 3 and 4 took their trial under the charges namely, the appellants and accused 3 under Section 302 read with Section 34 IPC and accused 4 under Section 302 read with Section 114, IPC. The appellants are brothers. Accused 3 (since acquitted) namely, Arakhita is the father of the appellants and accused 4 Pareswar Pradhan is the grandfather of the appellants.
2. The charge levelled against these appellants and others is that on April 3, 1974 at Kanbar, the appellants along with their father in furtherance of their common intention committed murder of one Gaja Bohi and the grandfather Pareswar Pradhan (accused 4) abetted the commission of the said offence. The trial court acquitted accused 4 and convicted the appellants under Section 304 IPC and sentenced both of them to undergo rigorous imprisonment for 7 years, and also convicted accused 3, namely the father of the appellants under Section 323 IPC and sentenced him to undergo RI for a period of six months.
3. The State on being aggrieved by the judgment of the trial court preferred an appeal as against all the accused. The High Court for the reasons assigned in its judgment confirmed the acquittal of accused 4 namely Pareswar Pradhan as well as the conviction of accused 3 Arakhita under Section 323 IPC and the sentence imposed therefore, but allowed the State appeal by converting the conviction of the appellants under Section 302 read with 34 IPC and sentenced each of them to undergo life imprisonment. Hence the present appeal by the appellants.
4. It is seen from the records that the prosecution has examined PWs 1, 3, 5, 7 and 11 as eye-witnesses to the occurrence in question. According to the evidence, appellant 2 - Rana Pradhan dealt lathi blows on the head of the deceased while the appellant 1 (Ghana Pradhan) stabbed on the right side of the chest of the deceased with a knife, which injury had passed through the lung. PW 12 has opined that both the injuries namely injury on the head as well as the injury on the chest were individually sufficient to cause the death of the deceased.
5. After hearing the learned counsel appearing for the appellants and the respondent and considering the entire evidence, we are of the view that appellant 2 namely, Rana Pradhan is liable only for an offence of culpable homicide not amounting to murder, punishable under Section 304 Part II IPC as the evidence is lacking for concluding that he shared the common intention of Ghana Pradhan in causing the death of the deceased.
Further the circumstances also indicate that he would not have intended to cause the death of the deceased so as to attract clause (3) of Section 300 but would have got the knowledge that such injury was likely to cause the death. So far as Ghana Pradhan is concerned (appellant 1), there is overwhelming direct evidence supported by the medical evidence, incriminating appellant 1 with the offence of murder, thereby making him liable to be punished under Section 302 IPC simpliciter.
6. We, accordingly, convict him under Section 302 instead of Section 302 read with 34 IPC and maintain the sentence of imprisonment for life. So far as Rana Pradhan is concerned, we set aside the conviction under Section 302 read with 34 IPC and the sentence of life imprisonment instead convict him under Section 304 Part II IPC and sentence him to undergo imprisonment for 7 years. Subject to the above alteration in the conviction of Rana Pradhan, the appeal is dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.
