State of Madhya Pradesh v Basanti Lal
Supreme Court of India

5 November 2003
Cr.A. No.772 Of 1996
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  The respondent along with six other persons were charged for an offence punishable u/s. 302 IPC read with S. 149 IPC for having committed the murder of one Sajjan Singh at about 10 p.m. of 30th June, 1983 in Panth Piploda village within the jurisdiction of police station Tal. The incident in question took place when the deceased had gone to ease himself. It is also the case of the prosecution that at that time the mother of the respondent was present there who was examined as PW.1.
The prosecution alleges that the respondent herein had fired shots at the deceased causing chest injury while other accused persons were armed with lathis though they did not take part in the attack.
2. It is also the prosecution case that the deceased made three dying declarations, one in the form of complaint made to the police, another in the form of statement u/s. 161 of the Code of Criminal Procedure of Criminal Procedure and the third was made before the Ilaka Magistrate. The deceased died on 5th July, 1983.
3.  The trial court after going through the material on record came to the conclusion that the prosecution has established its case against the respondent herein only while against the other accused persons it is failed to do so, accordingly, acquitted those persons and convicted the respondent herein for the offence punishable u/s. 302 IPC.
4.  The respondent herein preferred an appeal before the High Court of Madhya Pradesh at Indore. The High Court by the impugned judgment has allowed the appeal and set aside the conviction and sentence imposed on the respondent herein. Hence, this appeal by the State is before us.
5.  The High Court during the course of re-appreciation of the evidence noted the following findings for not accepting the prosecution case:
"(a) The sole eye-witness on whose testimony the conviction is based is partly disbelieved .
(b) Gun (Artile A) seized vide memo (Ex.P/7) is held to be not the weapon of offence .
(c) Ex.P/14 (shop map) does not show the presence of blood on the spot.
(d) There was admittedly no other source of light except the alleged moon-light which, as is urged would be unavailable id time of incident is accepted .
(e) Material witnesses Karan Singh and Bhanwar Singh, named in the first Information Report (Ex.P/13) and interrogated u/s. 161 of the Cr.P.C. are not examined in court .
(f) There is no strong motive to kill .
(g) Ex.P/13, P/24, P/8 alleged dying declarations are partly disbelieved ."
6.Having heard arguments of the learned counsel for the parties and after having perused the records we find no reason to disagree with the High Court, therefore, we find no merit in this appeal.
The appeal fails and the same is dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.
