Pyarey and Others v State of Uttar Pradesh
Supreme Court of India

14 November 2000
Cr.A. No. 1051 of 1998
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  Five persons were convicted for the murder of one Tota Ram under Section 302 read with Section 149 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 and all of them were sentenced to imprisonment for life. Though all the five preferred an appeal before the High Court, one of them died during the pendency of that appeal - his name is Dori. So the case as against him stood abated. A Division Bench of the Allahabad High Court heard the appeal of the remaining four and confirmed the conviction and sentence passed on them.
2. We heard arguments of Mr. Praveen Swarup, learned counsel for the State at length.Mr.M.C.Dhingra, learned counsel for the accused reported that he is engaged in the High Court. We requested the State counsel to take us through the evidence of the eyewitnesses so that any point in favour of the accused should not be missed.
The substance of the case is this:
3.  The first accused Pyarey was already an accused in a murder case (in the murder of one Mohan). The deceased in the present case Tota Ram was cited as a witness to the occurrence in that earlier murder case. Prosecution case is that Pyarey wanted deceased Tota Ram not to give evidence against Pyarey in the murder case, but that demand was spurned down by Tota Ram.
4. On 21-11-1978 when Shobhi Ram (PW 1) was doing agricultural operations in his field, his brother Tota Ram came by that way accompanied by two other persons (Manohar and Summeri). It was then that all the five accused ran towards the field. Seeing them running Manohar and Summeri fled away from the scene. As Tota Ram knew that the target of the assailants was himself he tried to escape from the scene. But he was chased by all the five accused and after some chase they succeeded in stopping the deceased. Three of the assailants (Pyarey, Dori and Gaindan) were armed with sharp-cutting weapons similar to axe and they stood in front of the deceased blocking his further running. The other two persons (Khargi and Shobhi) were armed with sticks, but they could reach only on the back side of the deceased. Witnesses' version is that the five assailants surrounded the deceased and the first three assailants attacked the deceased with the axe. Injuries sustained by the deceased thereby were so devastating that he died at the spot instantaneously.
5.  There were two eyewitnesses, PW 1 Shobhi Ram and PW 2 Ajudhi Singh. The evidence of both of them was discussed in detail by the trial court and the High Court. In the light of the defence strategy (totally denying their participation in the crime) the two courts considered the broad criticism levelled against those witnesses. Yet the two courts have chosen to place reliance on their testimony.
6. In this appeal under Article 136 of the Constitution we are not inclined to reopen the appreciation of evidence of the two eyewitnesses. Still we entertain doubt as to whether the accused Khargi and Shobhi would have shared the common object to murder Tota Ram. Evidence of the eyewitnesses has shown only that those two persons ran and remained behind the deceased. In spite of the fact that they were armed with sticks none of them used those weapons to inflict at least one beating on the deceased. None of them said anything at the spot. None of them prevented the deceased from running away nor did they step forward to stand in front of the deceased.
7.  In the aforesaid broad situation it is difficult to conclude that the accused Khargi and Shobhi ran only because they also shared the common object with the other assailants. Perhaps they would have run to rescue the deceased, but if that is too much to imagine at least they would have run to see what was going to happen. To say that their running was only with the common object along with the other assailants to murder the deceased we require something more to have been done by them. As the prosecution witnesses did not attribute anything more to those two accused, we find it difficult to confirm the conviction of those two persons with the help of Section 149 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
8.  In the result we confirm the conviction and sentence passed on the accused Pyarey and the accused Gaindan for the offence under Section 302 read with Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860. But we allow the appeal in respect of the accused Khargi and the accused Shobhi, and we set aside the conviction and sentence passed on them and acquit them. We direct that they should be released forthwith if they are not required in any other case.
This appeal is disposed of accordingly.
Appeal disposed of.
