Pehalwan and Another v State of Madhya Pradesh
Supreme Court of India

20 November 2003
Cr.A. No.715 Of 2003
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  Five accused persons were tried for the offence under Sections 147, 148, 302, 307, 324 read with 149 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860. The Sessions Court found all the five guilty of offence under Section 302 
 Indian Penal Code, 1860 read with Section 149 Indian Penal Code, 1860 and sentenced them to undergo rigorous imprisonment for life.
2. They were also found guilty of other allied offences. This appeal by special leave was originally filed by accused Harnarayan, Pehalwan and Roomal Singh. The appeal preferred by Harnarayan was dismissed. Pehalwan and Roomal Singh are before us challenging their conviction under Sections 302/149 Indian Penal Code, 1860. The prosecution case is that on 24-10-1986 at about noon the accused Rajalal and Harnarayan had a quarrel with Ram Singh as the cattle belonging to Ram Singh strayed into the field of Rajalal and he took the cattle to the pound. Ram Singh, deceased, got back the cattle from the pound and tethered it near his shed.
3. The further case of the prosecution is that accused Rajalal and Harnarayan came back with the present appellants Pehalwan, Roomal Singh and another accused Bhai Sahib and all of them mounted an attack on the deceased Ram Singh and others. Toran Singh PW-2, his wife Maya PW-4 and Parvati PW-5 wife of deceased Ram Singh sustained injuries. Another son of Toran Singh also sustained injuries but before the commencement of Sessions trial he died. Motilal PW-1 heard about the incident from his daughter and he met Parvati and collected further information and went to the Madhogarh police station and lodged FIR at 4.30 p.m. on the same day.
4.  Raja Singh PW-9, incharge of the police post Madhogarh, took over the investigation and prepared Ex.P/3- panchnama of the body of deceased Ram Singh. He collected blood stains from the soil from the place of incident and later made arrangements for having the post mortem examination of deceased Ram Singh.On the side of the prosecution PW-1 to PW-13 were examined. The main witnesses were Toran Singh PW-2, Maya PW-4 and Parvati PW-5.
5.  The counsel for the appellant contended before us that the whole prosecution story is false and these appellants had not participated in the crime and they came only later to the place of incident, and by that time the entire incident was over. Strong reliance was placed on the testimony of Parvati PW-5. PW-5 gave statement during the cross examination that these appellants came after the arrival of other accused persons.
However, in later part of the cross examination she clarified that these appellants were present and had joined hands with other accused in causing injuries to the deceased. The other eye witnesses also supported this case and therefore, we can only assume that the solitary statement of PW-5 must have been given under some mistaken impression.
6.  The counsel for the appellants further contended that all the three eye witnesses have not specifically stated as to what are the various overt-acts committed by each of the accused. As per the prosecution, four accused persons were armed with farsa and appellant Roomal Singh was armed with lathi. These witnesses deposed that all the accused caused injuries to each of the injured and also the deceased. The medical evidence adduced in this case shows that the deceased Ram Singh had sustained as many as eleven injuries and had also fracture of right frontal and parietal bone, left parietal bone and rib. The nature of injuries sustained by PW-2, PW-4 and PW-5 fully support that all the accused had caused injuries to these persons. When a group of persons attack, it is impossible for any witness to state as to which are the individual acts of which of the assailants. We find no reasons to agree with the submissions made by the learned counsel for the appellants.
The prosecution had succeeded in proving the prosecution case beyond reasonable doubt and accused are rightly convicted by the Sessions Court and there is no infirmity in the judgment of the High Court.
The appeal is accordingly dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.
