State of Punjab v Buta Singh and Others
Supreme Court of India

18 November 2003
Cr.A. No.397 Of 1997
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  This appeal has been filed by the State of Punjab challenging the acquittal of A-3 and A-4 who were convicted along with A-1 and A-2 in Sessions Case No.63 of 1991 (Sessions Trial No.45 of 1992) by the learned trial judge for offences punishable under Section 302 read with Section 34 IPC and in addition of A-3 for the offence punishable under Section 323 IPC and of other accused for the offences punishable under Section 323 read with Section 34 IPC.
2. The case of the prosecution was that on 4.7.1991 at about 8.00 PM A-2 (Hadayat) armed with a takua and A-4 (Suba) armed with kirpan went to the house of Sheela, the sister-in-law of complainant Malok and insisted her to open the door. When the complainant who was said to be present inside the house, questioned them as to why they are troubling her sister-in-law and children these two persons tried to kill the complainant. It is the further claim that he ran out followed by the sister-in-law with her children and they claimed to have spent the whole night in the house of Punnu. The said two accused allegedly remained on the roof of residential house of Sheela and only in the morning left the place. When the matter was reported to the Panchayat, the Panchayat reprimanded the accused and compromised the matter. On the following day the complainant was attacked by A-1 (Buta) and A-2 (Hadayat) who were armed with takuas and A-4 (Suba) who was armed with a Kirpan and A-3 (Anayat ) who was armed with a long dang. It is alleged that Buta raised a lalkara that they should not spare the complainant and so saying gave a takua blow from the reverse side on the chest of complainant (Malok) and the same was followed by A-3 by giving a dang blow on the right hand. The hue and cry raised by the complainant attracted his brother Bahla and Punnu also to the spot. When Bahla stepped to intervene to rescue the complainant, A-1 gave takua blow on his head and A-4 exhorted his co-accused to kill Bahla and thereupon A-2 was said to have given a takua blow on the right eye of Bahla. On alarm being raised by the complainant party, the accused ran away from the spot with their respective weapons.
3.  On complaint being lodged to the police and completion of the investigation the accused were charged for the offences punishable under Section 302 read with Section 34 IPC. So far as A-3 was concerned he was also charged under Section 323 IPC and others under Section 323 read with Section 34 IPC for causing simple hurt to Malok, the complainant. Since the accused took the stand of not guilty, trial was held in which oral as well as documentary evidence, in addition to the medical evidence was let in. During the course of examination of the accused under Section 313 of the Code of Criminal Procedure accused denied the incriminating circumstances pointed out and pleaded false implication on the suspicion that A-3 and A-4 had illicit relations with the sister-in-law of the complainant.
4.  On consideration of the materials on record the learned trial judge came to the conclusion that the charges have been sufficiently substantiated against the accused and all the accused were sentenced to undergo life imprisonment under Section 302 read with Section 34 IPC in addition to a fine of Rs.5, 000/- each with default clause therefor. In addition thereto, A-3 was also convicted under Section 323 while the other accused were convicted under Section 323 read with Section 34 IPC and also sentenced to six months rigorous imprisonment.
5.  Aggrieved, accused pursued the matter in appeal before the High Court. A Division Bench of the High Court on reappreciation of the materials on record while affirming the conviction and sentence imposed on A-1 and A-2 acquitted them of the charge under Section 323/34 IPC. So far as A-3 and A-4 are concerned, their appeals were allowed in its entirety and they were acquitted of all the charges. Hence, this appeal by the State.
6.  While ordering notice in the special leave petition on 30.4.1996 this Court dismissed the SLP so far as A-4 was concerned and in respect of others only notice was issued and ultimately leave was granted.
7.  Heard the learned counsel for the appellant-State and learned counsel for the respondents.
8.  Learned counsel on either side invited our attention to the relevant portions of the judgments of the courts below as also the evidence of witnesses on whom reliance has been placed by the learned trial judge who recorded a finding of conviction.
9. In our view, the trial court though has referred to the evidence in detail seems to have committed an error in not properly analysing the same with reference to the involvement and role of A-3 and A-4. The consideration in this regard on the face of it appears to be perfunctory and really did not warrant their conviction. To this extent the consideration by the High Court and the appreciation of the evidence, in our view, appears to be reasonable and the conclusions arrived at to affirm the conviction of only A-1 and A-2 are found to be well merited.
10.  In spite of our careful consideration of the materials brought to our notice we are unable to persuade ourselves to agree with the learned counsel for the appellant-State that any interference with the judgment of the High Court exonerating A-3 and A-4 is called for. Similarly, the reasons assigned by the High Court to acquit A-1 and A-2 of the offences punishable under Section 323 read with Section 34 IPC also seems to be well merited. As long as the conclusions arrived at by the High Court are found to be justified on an appreciation of the evidence on record in their proper perspective and which is not shown to be perverse or arbitrary, there is hardly any justification for this Court to interfere with the verdict of acquittal.
11.  Consequently, we see no merit whatsoever in this appeal. The appeal fails and shall stand dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.
