State of Maharashtra v Narain Singh Yadav and another
Supreme Court of India

12 September 2002
Cr.As. Nos. 811-17 of 1995
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  Despite service, neither the respondents have filed vakalatnama nor put in appearance.
2.  The High Court at Bombay, in its writ jurisdiction u/art. 226 of the Constitution, thought it fit to quash the criminal proceedings solely on the ground of lapse of time.
3.  The decision in Abdul Rehman Antulay v. R.S. Nayak 1991 Indlaw SC 313 stands considered in the latter pronouncement of this Court in P. Ramachandra Rao v. State of Karnataka 2002 Indlaw SC 267 wherein 'Common Cause' A Registered Society v. Union of India 1996 Indlaw SC 3970, 'Common Cause' A Registered Society v. Union of India 1996 Indlaw SC 1996 Raj Deo Sharma v. State of Bihar 1998 Indlaw SC 1131 and Raj Deo Sharma (II) v. State of Bihar 1999 Indlaw SC 741 were stated to be no longer good laws. This Court has had the opportunity to lay down certain specific guidelines in the matter of quashing of criminal complaints. Since the decision in King Emperor v. Khwaja Nazir Ahmad 1944 Indlaw PC 22 and subsequent pronouncement of this Court in State of W.B. v. Swapan Kumar Guha 1982 Indlaw SC 203 there is one clear thread of continuity that the prosecution ought not to be quashed unless the same can be termed to be illegal, perverse or mala fide in nature. We wish to indicate that the writ jurisdiction is not available for quashing the criminal investigation unless there is error apparent on the face of the record or the proceedings can be termed to be mala fide in nature. Mere lapse of time ought not to be permitted to be meant for intervention of the writ court to quash a proceeding.
4.  In P. Ramachandra Rao 2002 Indlaw SC 267 (supra) the Constitution Bench of this Court has been rather specific as regards the period of time during which a criminal proceeding shall have to be completed or closed. In P. Ramachandra Rao 2002 Indlaw SC 267 (supra) this Court observed:
"Secondly, though we are deleting the directions made respectively by two- and three-Judge Benches of this Court in the cases under reference, for reasons which we have already stated, we should not, even for a moment, be considered as having made a departure from the law as to speedy trial and speedy conclusion of criminal proceedings of whatever nature and at whichever stage before any authority or the court. It is the constitutional obligation of the State to dispense speedy justice, more so in the field of criminal law, and paucity of funds or resources is no defence to denial of right to justice emanating from Articles 21,19 and 14 and the Preamble of the Constitution as also from the directive principles of State policy. It is high time that the Union of India and the various States realise their constitutional obligation and do something concrete in the direction of strengthening the justice-delivery system. We need to remind all concerned of what was said by this Court in Hussainara Khatoon (IV) v. Home Secy., State of Bihar 1979 Indlaw SC 112.
The State cannot be permitted to deny the constitutional right of speedy trial to the accused on the ground that the State has no adequate financial resources to incur the necessary expenditure needed for improving the administrative and judicial apparatus with a view to ensuring speedy trial. The State may have its financial constraints and its priorities in expenditure, but, 'the law does not permit any Government to deprive its citizens of constitutional rights on a plea of poverty', or administrative inability."
5. We record our concurrence with the observations of this Court not only by reason of its binding nature but by reason of its reasonings available from the judgment.
6.  More or less, under the similar situation, this Court, speaking through one of us (Arijit Pasayat, J.), has been pleased to observe in State v. Dr. Narayan Waman Nerukar 2002 Indlaw SC 1615 thus:
"While considering the question of delay the court has a duty to see whether the prolongation was on account of any delaying tactics adopted by the accused and other relevant aspects which contributed to the delay. Number of witnesses examined, volume of documents likely to be exhibited, nature and complexity of the offence which is under investigation or adjudication are some of the relevant factors. There can be no empirical formula of universal application in such matters. Each case has to be judged in its own background and special features, if any. No generalisation is possible and should be done. It has also to be borne in mind that the criminal courts exercise available powers such as those under Sections 309, 311 and 258 CrPC to effectuate right to speedy trial."
7.  In the instant matter, the State of Maharashtra is in appeal against the order of the learned Single Judge, as noticed above, quashing the proceedings u/art. 226 of the Constitution. In the view we have subscribed, as above, and in terms of the decision of the Constitution Bench of this Court in P. Ramachandra Rao the judgment seems to be ex facie wrong and erroneous.
8.  The criminal appeals, thus, succeed. The order under appeal stands set aside. Criminal Cases Nos. 132/S, 133/S and 134/S of 1981 stand restored to the file of the Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, 32nd Court, Esplanade, Bombay; Criminal Cases Nos. 12/S, 15/S, 17/S and 19/S of 1981, Criminal Cases Nos. 4/S, 5/S, 6/S, 7/S and 8/S of 1983 stand restored to the file of the Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, 38th Court, Ballard Pier, Bombay; and Sessions Case No. 446 of 1982 stands restored to the file of the Court of Session for Greater Bombay. The Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrates/learned Sessions Judge would do well to dispose of the same with utmost expedition and preferably within a period of one year from the date of the communication of the order. This restriction of a period of one year is being directed by reason of the fact that the matter is pending before the law courts for a substantial period of time.
Appeals allowed.
