State of Uttar Pradesh v Rajendra Kumar
Supreme Court of India

5 November 2003
Cr.A. No. 746 Of 1996

The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  The respondent was charged for an offence punishable under Section 302 IPC for having committed the murder of his wife in the night intervening between 12th and 13th July, 1980. The motive suggested by the prosecution is dowry demand.
2.  The prosecution case stated briefly is that on 12th of July, 1980 the respondent and his wife visited their native place within the jurisdiction of Kotwali, District Muzaffarnagar where the deceased's father was residing. According to the prosecution the respondent and his wife went to sleep on 12th and 13th July, 1980 in the new house built in that village and their presence in that house on that night was noticed by PW.3-Rati Ram, PW.5-Amar Singh and PW.10-Ram Kumar. Next day morning the father of the deceased came to know that her daughter died due to strangulation. The complaint, therefore, was lodged within the jurisdictional police. The Investigating Officer after investigation charged the respondent for the offence punishable under Section 302 IPC.
3.  The trial court after trial accepting the evidence of Pws.3, 5 and 10 that they had last seen husband and wife together and disbelieving the alibi put forth by the respondent convicted the respondent for the offence punishable under Section 302 IPC. In appeal the High Court has allowed the appeal and reversed the said finding.
4.  During the course of appreciation of evidence the High Court came to the conclusion that so far as PW.3, Rati Ram is concerned his evidence cannot be accepted because he is admittedly a history sheeter under the influence of the police investigating the case. In regard to PW.5-Amar Singh, the High Court noticed the fact that in his prior statement under Section 161 of the Code of Criminal Procedure he had stated that he had seen the dead body of the deceased in the old house of the father of the deceased while in the Court he has given a different version by stating that the dead body was found in the new house. This contradiction according to the High Court was sufficient not to place reliance on his evidence. In regard to the PW.10-Ram Kumar, the High Court noticed the fact that his prior statement was recorded by the police after five days of the incident, therefore, his evidence is suspect.
5. The court also noticed the fact that the prosecution was not clear as to who exactly had seen the dead body first as also who actually informed the father of the deceased as to the finding of the dead body. In this background the High Court came to the conclusion that it is not safe to rely upon the prosecution case.
Having heard the learned counsel for the parties and perused the material on record, we find no reason to interfere with the impugned judgment of the High Court. The appeal fails and the same is dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.
