Jadu Sahani and Others v State of Bihar
Supreme Court of India

30 September 1997
Cr.A. No. 915 of 1996, Dt. 30 September 1997.
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  This appeal is directed against the judgment and order of the High Court of Patna, dated 13-9-1995 passed in Criminal Appeal No. 340 of 1985.
2.  Broadly stated, the case of the prosecution was that a swarm of people went in the area of the village of the complainant party in order to catch fish from a pond. Their number was considerable. The complainant party objected to those People entering into the fish pond in order to catch fish and challenged them to show any title to the pond or to fishing rights. This led to an exchange of unseemly words between the posted factions. There arose a clash; as a result of which two persons on the complainant side and one person on the accused side met his end, and a large number of people were otherwise injured.
3. The matter was reported to the Police by Bindeshwari Singh, PW-14, which set the investigation into motion. Two cross-cases were put up by the investigation for trial. The faction of the present accused lost in both cases. Their conviction and sentence as recorded by the Court of Session for offences under sections 302, 302/149, 302/34, 307/34 and 148 IPC were confirmed by the High Court in appeal. Details of various sentences awarded thereunder are disclosed in the orders of the Court of Session which have been affirmed by the High Court.
4.  The sole point worth consideration in this appeal is, whether there arose an unlawful assembly, the common object of which was to go on a killing spree or was it an unlawful assembly the common object of which was in any manner different. It may be noticed that prior to the instant occurrence, there was no cause of friction between the two parties. The accused persons had come at the spot duly armed though not with a purpose of causing any injury to any human being but had, as is usual with the villagers, carried weapons while out on a fishing sport. It is a different matter that they were objected to and heated words ware exchanged by the parties. We cannot conceive that the unlawful assembly which grew up spontaneously had the sole object of causing murders but it can be ruled instantly that the common object of the assembly was to cause assault on the complainant party.
5. The degree and gravity of assault would have to be gauged in this background. It then transpires that the sole fatal injury on Ram Udgar Singh, deceased, was attributed to Laxmi Yadav by means of an arrow and the sole injury on Biku Singh, deceased, was attributed to Jadu Sahani, again by means of an arrow. The respective arrows with wooden handles were detected on post mortem examination of both the deceased. Therefore, it logically follows that Laxmi Yadav and Jadu Sahani were individually guilty for offence under Section 302 IPC each and we find that they had rightly been convicted for offence of murder, though with the aid of Section 149 IPC. A slight correction, therefore, would have to be made to make them individually liable for the offence under section 302 IPC substantively. Their respective sentences of life imprisonment would, therefore, have to be affirmed. It is so ordered.
6.  Insofar as the remaining accused are concerned, they did not touch both the deceased at all. Their role was kept cordoned in causing grievous and simple injuries to P.Ws. 8 and 10 to 14. The High Court has convicted all these appellants under Section 302/149 IPC as well as under Section 307/149 IPC. Since on adjudging Laxmi Yadav and Jadu Sahani, appellants alone guilty for substantive offence of murder, it goes as sequel that the rest of the appellants would stand acquitted of the charge under section 302/149 IPC but, at the same time, the conviction of all the appellants under section 307/34 IPC and sentences of 4 years' R.I. imposed thereunder on each appellant for the assault made on the P.Ws., would stand confirmed. It would be academic to make the exercise of scaling down the offence to be under section 326 IPC or Section 325 IPC, for the same result sentence-wise can be achieved. We would rather leave the conviction, as it is, as well as that under section 148 IPC for which each of the appellants has been sentenced to 2 years R.I. which sentences have already been ordered to be running concurrently.
7. Thus, as a result, this appeal stands decided inasmuch as the appeal of Jadu Sahani and Laxmi Yadav would stand dismissed; and the appeal of the remaining appellants would stand allowed, in part, but in the manner and to the extent afore-indicated.
Appeal partly allowed.
