State of Andhra Pradesh and Another v P. Sagar
Supreme Court of India

27 March 1968
Civil Appeal No. 1336 of 1967.
The Judgment was delivered by : Shah, J.
1. Against the order passed by the High Court of Andhra Pradesh declaring invalid the
"reservation for backward classes under Rule 4A and 5A respectively of the Telangana and the Andhra Rules, and the directions in respect of the President's Scouts and. Guides"
2. The State of Andhra Pradesh is divided into two areas-Telangana and Andhra areas. In the Telangana area there are two Medical Colleges having in the aggregate 270 seats for entrants to the medical degree course. In Andhra area there are four Medical Colleges having in the aggregate 550 seats for new entrants. In admitting candidates for the medical degree course by Government orders Nos. 1135 &1136 Health, Housing and Municipal Administration Department dated June 16, 1966, seats were reserved for Central Government nominees, for N.C.C., A.C.C President's Scouts &Guides, for candidates with sports and extracurricular proficiency, for children of ex-Service army personnel, for children of displaced goldsmiths, for candidates from Scheduled Castes and Tribes, for women candidates, for candidates appearing from H.S.C. Multipurpose I.S.C. &P.U.C. Examinations, and for candidates who had secured the M.Sc. &B.Sc. degrees. By Government order No. 1880 dated July 29, 1966, twenty per cent. of the total number of seats were reserved for backward classes in each area, and pursuant thereto the Telangana Rules were amended by G.O. M.S. No. 1784-Health and the Andhra Rules were amended by G.O. M.S. No. 1783- Health dated August 2, 1966. The Validity of the Government orders Nos. 1135 &1136 was challenged on the ground that they infringed the fundamental freedoms guaranteed under Arts. 15(4), 16(4) and 29(2) of the Constitution. The High Court held that in reserving seats for nominees of the Central Government and from other States, for cultural scholars, for women, for graduates and for students from H.S.C. &P.U.C. Courses, no fundamental rights were infringed, but the reservations for members of the backward classes described in the list prepared by the Government of Andhra Pradesh were invalid.By Art. 15 of the Constitution, as originally enacted, it was provided that
"(1) The State shall not discriminate against any citizen on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, place of birth or any of them. (2).................................. (3)Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making my special provisions for women and children."Art. 29(2) provided that" No citizen shall be denied admission into any educational institution maintained by the State or receiving aid out of State funds on grounds only of religion, race, caste, language or any of them.
By Art.. 46, which occurs in Ch. IV relating to Directive Principles of State Policy, the State was enjoined to promote the educational and economic interests of the weaker sections of the people, but Arts.' 15 and 29 as originally framed prohibited the making of, any discrimination against any citizen on grounds only of religion, , race, caste, sex, place, of birth or any of them. In the State of Madras v. Shrimati Champakam Dorairajan( 1951 Indlaw SC 44 ) an order issued by the Government of the State of Madras fixing the number of seats for particular communities for selection of candidates for admission to the Engineering and Medical Colleges in the State was challenged on the ground that it violated the guarantee against d crimination under Art. 25(2) of the"
"Nothing in this article or in cl. (2) of art. 29 shall prevent the State from making any special provision for the advancement of any socially and educationally backward classes of citizens or for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes."
"was a fraud on the constitutional power conferred on the State by Art. 15(4)"
3. On February 3, 1964, the. previous order issued by the State of Andhra Pradesh was cancelled. Thereafter it is claimed by the' State of Andhra Pradesh that it took steps to prepare a fresh list of backward classes consistently with the provisions of the Constitution. The Chief Secretary of the Government of Andhra Pradesh has sworn in his affidavit that the Council of Ministers appointed a Sub-Committee to draw up a list of backward classes, inter alia, for the purpose of admission of students to professional Colleges.The Committee invited the Law Secretary and the Director of Social Welfare to attend the meetings of the Sub-Committe, and letters were written to the other States calling for information about the criteria adopted by those States for determining backward classes for purposes of Am. 15(4) and 16(4) of the Constitution, that after considering the replies received from the Chief Secretaries of the various States it was resolved 'that the existing list of backward classes pertaining to Andhra and Telangana areas he scrutinised with a view to selecting from that list those castes or communities which are
"considered backward on account of the low standard of living, education, poverty, places of habitation, inferiority of occupations followed etc"
"the order of priority in consultation with the Law Secretary, taking into consideration the criteria given by Law Secretary in his note to the Cabinet Sub-Committee and that in doing so such of the criteria as capable of being practically possible for consideration may be taken into account"
"drew up a list of the order of priority as called for by the Cabinet Sub-Committee"
"for the more premise effectuation of concessions to those classes only who really need them"
4. In the context in which it occurs the expression "class" means a homogeneous section of the people grouped together because of certain likenesses or common traits and who are identifiable by some common attributes such as status, rank, occupation, residence .in a locality, race, religion and the like. In determining whether a particular section forms a class, caste cannot be excluded altogether. But in the determination of a class a test solely based upon the caste or community cannot also be accepted. By cl. (1), Art. 15 prohibits the State from discriminating against any citizen on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, place of birth or any of them. By cl. (3) of Art., 15 the State is, notwithstanding the provision contained in cl. (1), permitted to make special pro, vision for women and children. By cl. (4) a special provision for the advancement of any socially and educationally backward classes of citizens or for the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes is outside the purview of cl. (1). But cl. (4) is an exception to cl. (1). Being an exception, it cannot be extended so as in effect to destroy the Guarantee of cl. (1). The Parliament has by enacting cl. (4) attempted to balance as against the right of equality of citizens the special necessities of the weaker sections of the people by allowing a provision to be made for their advancement. In order that effect may be given to cl. (4), it must a pear that the beneficiaries of the special provision are classes which are backward socially and educationally and they are other than the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, and that the provision made .is for their advancement.
5. Reservation may be adopted to advance the interests of weaker sections of society, but in doing so, care must be taken to see that deserving and qualified candidates are not excluded from admission, to higher educational institutions. The criterion for determining the backwardness Must not be based solely on religion, race, caste, sex, or place of birth, and, the backwardness being social, and educational must be similar to the backwardness from which the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes suffer. These are the principles which have been enunciated in the decision of this Court in.M. R. Balaji's case and R. Chitralekha &Another v. State of Mysore.and. others( 1964 Indlaw SC 103 ). In R. Chitralekha's case , Subba Rao, J., speaking for the majority of the Court observed at p. 388
"The important factor to be noticed in Art. 15(4) is that it does not speak of castes, but only speaks of classes. If the makers of the Constitution intended to take castes also as units of social and educational backwardness, they would have said so as they have said in the case of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes. Though it may be suggested that the wider expression "cLasses" is used in cl. (4) of Art. 15 as there are communities without castes, if the intention was to equate classes with castes, nothing prevented the makers of the constitution from using the expression "backward classes or castes'. The juxtaposition of the expression" backward classes"and" Scheduled Castes"in Art. 15(4) also leads to a reasonable inference that the expression" classes"
6. It may be that for ascertaining whether a particular citizen or a group of citizens belong to a backward class or not, his or their caste may have some relevance, but it cannot be either the sole or the dominant criterion for ascertaining the class to which he or they belong.
"In a recent judgment of this Court P. Rajendran &Ors. v. The State of Madras and others( 1968 Indlaw SC 341 ), Wanchoo, C.J., speaking for the Court observed:"
"That case makes no departure from the rule enunciated in the earlier cases.
The list dated June 21, 1963, of castes prepared by the Andhra Pradesh Government to determine backward classes for the purpose of Art. 15(4) was declared invalid by the High Court of' Andhra Pradesh in P. Sukhadev's case. A fresh list was published under the amended rules with some modifications, but the basic scheme of the list was apparently not altered. It is true that the affidavits filed by the Chief Secretary in the High Court and the Director of Social Welfare in this Court have set out the steps taken for preparing the Est of backward classes. It is also stated in the affidavit of the Director of Social Welfare that he considered the representations made to him, consulted the Law Secretary and certain publications relating to the study of backward classes e.g. Thurston's "Caste and Tribes" and Sirajul- Hasan's "Castes and Tribes", and made his recommendations which were modified by the Sub-Committee appointed by the Council of Ministers and ultimately the Council of Ministers prepared a final list of backward classes. But before the High Court the materials which the Cabinet Sub-Committee or the Council of Ministers considered were not placed, nor was any evidence led about the criteria adopted by them for the purpose of determining the backward classes. The High Court observed:"
".... We are not able to ascertain whether any material, and if so, what material was placed before the Cabinet Sub-Committee, upon which the list of backward classes was drawn. On the other hand, it is stated that the Law Secretary and the Director of Social Welfare sat together and drew up a list, the former specifying the legal requirements and the latter as an expert advising on the social and educational backwardness of class or classes."
7. It was urged before the High Court that expert knowledge of the Director of Social Welfare and of the Law Secretary was brought to bear upon the consideration of the relevant materials in the preparation of the list and they were satisfied that the correct tests were applied in the determination of backward classes and on that -account the list should be accepted by the High Court. The High Court in dealing with the argument observed:
".... the impugned backward classes list cannot be and has not been sustained by the Government as coming within the exception provided in Art. 15(4) on any material placed before this Court. In fact, there is a total absence of any material, from which we can say that the Government applied the criteria enunciated by their Lordships of the Supreme Court in the above referred cases, in preparing the list of backward classes. We cannot accept the contention of the learned Advocate General that"
". Acceptance of this argument would make for arbitrariness, absolving the party on whom the burden of proof to bring it within the exception rests, from proving it. The mere fact that the act is bona fide and that there was total absence of mala fides, is not relevant."
8. The High Court has repeatedly observed in the course of their judgment that no materials at all were placed on the record to enable them to decide whether the criteria laid down by this Court for determining that the list prepared by the Government conformed to the requirements of cl. (4) of Art. 15 were followed. On behalf of the State it was merely asserted that an enquiry was in fact made with the aid of expert officers and the Law Secretary and the question was examined from all points of view by the officers of the State, by the Cabinet Sub-Committee and by the Cabinet.- But whether in that examination the correct criteria were applied is not a matter on which any assumption could be made especially when the list prepared is exfacie based on castes or communities and in substantially the list which was struck down by the High Court in P. Sukhadev's case Honesty of purpose of those who prepared and published the list was not and is not challenged, but the validity of a law which apparently infringes the fundamental rights of citizens cannot be upheld merely because the law-maker was satisfied that what he did was right or that he believes that he acted in manner consistent with the constitutional guarantees of the citizen. The test of the validity of a law alleged to infringe the fundamental rights of a citizen or any. act done in execution of that law lies not in the belief of the maker of the law or of the person executing the law, but in the demonstration by evidence and argument before the Courts that the guaranteed right is not infringed.The appeal therefore fails and is dismissed.,
