Kanwal Kishore Jerath v Union Territory of Chandigarh
Supreme Court of India

19 March 2001
Petition(s) for Special Leave to Appeal (Cr.) No. 390-393/2001
The order of the Court was as follows:
1.  The petitioner is facing trial before the learned Special Judge, Chandigarh in an offence under section 13 (1) (d) of the Prevention of Corruption Act read with sections 406, 409, 420 and 467 of the IPC. Out of the 51 accused persons facing trial, 50 of them are on bail and petitioner is the only person, who has not been granted bail.
2.  Petitioner had earlier approached this Court, but the Court by order dated 15-12-1999 rejected the prayer at that stage taking into account the gravity of offence. But the Court had ordered that the petitioner may renew the prayer for bail after expiry of 6 months. Pursuance to the said order, 6 months after, the petitioner renewed his prayer for bail before the High Court of Punjab and Haryana.
The High Court by the impugned order examined the materials and came to the conclusion that in the case in hand, the petitioner ought not to be released on bail. Pursuance to the notice issued by this Court, on behalf of the State, a counter affidavit has been filed indicating the seriousness of the offence and giving reasons as to why the petitioner shall not be released on bail.
3. Having heard Mr. Mohta for the petitioner and Ms.Jaiswal for the Union Territory of Chandigarh, and having regard to the facts and circumstances of the case, particulary taking into account the fact that the petitioner is in custody since 27th November, 1998, we think it appropriate to release the petitioner on bail and we accordingly so direct. Ms. Jaiswal contended that the petitioner should be put to strict terms, even if he is released on bail.
4.  We leave the matter open for being pressed before the learned Special Judge, who will consider the submissions made by the Public Prosecutor, and put such terms and conditions for releasing the petitioner on bail to his satisfaction, while passing the order in question, as he thinks fit. The SLPs. are disposed of.
Petitions disposed of.
